Approved for Public Release; Distribution Unlimited: 88ABW-2015-2881, 08 Jun 2015

Joint Doctrine Ontology: A Benchmark for Military
Information Systems Interoperability
Peter Morosoff

Ron Rudnicki

Jason Bryant

Robert Farrell

Barry Smith

E-Maps, Inc.,
Fairfax, VA
peter.morosoff@e-mapsys.com

CUBRC
Buffalo, NY
rudnicki@cubrc.org

Air Force Research Lab
Rome, NY
jason.bryant.8@us.af.mil

Air Force Research Lab
Rome, NY
robert.farrell.10@us.af.mil

University at Buffalo
Buffalo, NY
phismith@buffalo.edu

Abstract—When the U.S. conducts warfare, elements of a
force are drawn from different Services and work together as
a single team to accomplish an assigned mission on the basis of
joint doctrine. To achieve such unified action, it is necessary
that specific Service doctrines be both consistent with and
subservient to joint doctrine. But there are two further
requirements that flow from the ways in which unified action
increasingly involves not only live forces but also automated
systems. First, the information technology that is used in joint
warfare must be aligned with joint doctrine. Second, the
separate information systems used by the different elements of
a joint force must be interoperable, in the sense that data and
information that is generated by each element must be usable
(understandable, processable) by all the other elements that
need them. Currently, such interoperability is impeded by
multiple inconsistencies among the different data and software
standards used by warfighters. We describe here the on-going
project of creating a Joint Doctrine Ontology (JDO), which
uses joint doctrine to provide shared computer-accessible
content valid for any field of military endeavor, organization,
and information system. JDO addresses the two previouslymentioned requirements of unified action by providing a
widely applicable benchmark for use by developers of
information systems that will both guarantee alignment with
joint doctrine and support interoperability.
Keywords—joint doctrine, military doctrine, ontology, Basic
Formal Ontology (BFO), Common Core Ontologies (CCO), joint
warfare, unified operations, interoperability, terminology,
definition

I. JOINT DOCTRINE
The publications of joint doctrine document fundamental
principles and overarching guidance for the employment of
the Armed Forces of the United States [1]. Joint doctrine
applies to all military, from the joint staff to commanders of
combatant commands, their supporting commands, and to
the individual Services, each of which has its own Servicespecific doctrinal publications. Joint doctrine is authoritative
in the sense that, if conflicts arise between it and Service
doctrine, then the former – absent more current and specific
guidance from the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff –
will take precedence.
Joint doctrine provides the benchmark for interoperability of the separate Service doctrines. And because all
Service-level terminology is dependent on joint doctrine it is

critical, if we are to prevent higher-level flaws cascading to
domain-level doctrinal errors, that the terms of joint doctrine
be defined correctly.
It is commonly supposed that doctrine provides not hard
and fast rules but rather merely a loose and always revisable
guide to action that is typically abandoned on first contact
with the enemy. Doctrine is however authoritative also in
the sense that it is to be followed in all cases except when, in
the judgment of the commander, exceptional circumstances
dictate otherwise. Moreover, there are many doctrinally
acknowledged features of military action that survive
through every engagement. Doctrine defines the shared
frame of reference that remains active through every phase
of every military engagement. This is because doctrine
provides the principles that determine how to understand the
authorized command relationships and the authority that
military commanders can use. It establishes common ways
of accomplishing military tasks and facilitates readiness by
promoting coordination of training and planning. Most
importantly for our purposes here, doctrine provides a
common lexicon – a set of precise terms and precise
definitions – expressed in a language that is designed to
enable consistent understanding by military leaders,
planners and educators. Doctrine thereby enables the sort of
effective communication among warfighters that is needed
for unified action.
II. BATTLE MANAGEMENT LANGUAGE (BML)
While doctrine has been developed and used thus far to
satisfy the needs of human beings, it is increasingly
understood that it must also satisfy requirements that come
into play when information systems are brought to bear in
military action. The language used by warfighters and
codified in field manuals and doctrinal lexica still involves
some of the ambiguities characteristic of all languages used
by human beings. But such ambiguities can be tolerated
where human beings are involved because humans can
easily disambiguate the meanings of ambiguous terms in
everyday contexts of use.
The very human-friendliness of the language used by
warfighters brings an equal and opposite weakness,
however, when information systems are involved.
Computers have difficulties in interpreting the common
language of human beings and in using contextual cues to
resolve ambiguities. Attempts to overcome these difficulties

STIDS 2015 Proceedings Page 2

led in around 2000 to the conception of the Battle
Management Language (BML) [2] that was designed to
allow the description of a commander’s intent in the sort of
context-free way that would support processing by
automated systems. The initial goal of BML was to create a
unified and unambiguous representation of command and
control (C2) doctrine as a ‘systematic data model’ [2]. BML
was seen as thereby providing a unified framework that
would not only remove ambiguities but also rectify the
terminological disunities created through the continued
dominance of disparate Service cultures and of the
numerous communities of interest within those cultures [3].
III. INTEROPERABILITY
BML continues as an active project [4]-[5], especially in
the modeling and simulation community. The promised
unambiguous representation of the content of C2 doctrine
using BML has, however, not been achieved. Here, we take
up once again the idea of formalizing joint doctrine by
drawing on more recent developments in the field of
ontology. Our target, however, is more modest. It is not to
provide the resources to capture formally a commander’s
intent. Rather, we seek to capture in a computer-usable
form the terminological content of joint doctrine in a way
that will support the sort of interoperability that is needed
where live forces need to engage in unified action with
information systems.
Interoperability is defined in the Glossary of DoD
Instruction (DoDI) 8330.01 [6] as:
The ability of systems, units, or forces to provide data, information,
materiel, and services to, and accept the same from, other systems,
units, or forces, and to use the data, information, materiel, and
services exchanged to enable them to operate effectively together. IT
interoperability includes both the technical exchange of information
and the end-to-end operational effectiveness of that exchange of
information as required for mission accomplishment.

Our hypothesis is that the creation of a Joint Doctrine
Ontology (JDO) can provide a widely applicable
benchmark for use by developers of information systems
that will support rather than impede unified action by
breaking down existing terminological silos of different
Services and communities of interest.
In contrast to the BML, our alternative approach
begins, not with defining a new language, but rather with
the existing authoritative controlled vocabulary that is
defined in Joint Publication 1-02, the Department of
Defense Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms [7].
The JP 1-02 dictionary consists in its current version of
some 2,803 terms drawn from some 81 approved doctrinal
publications forming the Joint Doctrine Hierarchy (at
http://www.dtic.mil/doctrine/doctrine/status.pdf). In effect,
we are constructing JDO as a shadow of JP 1-02,
incrementally adding definitional enhancements and further elements of logical regimentation, but in such a way
that the ontology, and the dictionary that underlies it, remain synchronized with each other through future revisions
of joint doctrine. In effect, JDO will provide a semantic
enhancement of JP 1-02, and therefore also of the termino-

logical content of the separate Joint Publications from
which the terms and definitions of JP 1-02 are derived.
The Dictionary defines the standard U.S. military and
associated terminology needed to enable the joint activity of
the Armed Forces of the United States. As stated in the
Preface signed by Vice Admiral William E. Gortney,
Director of the Joint Staff, these military and associated
terms, together with their definitions, constitute approved
Department of Defense (DOD) terminology for general use
by all DOD components. [7]
In multiple other joint publications, as well as in a series
of DoD and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
instructions, it is required that all DoD initiatives, as well as
all warfighters and warfighting organizations, should use a
common terminology. In addition, instructions state that all
IT intended for use in military operations should be
designed from the beginning to be interoperable (paragraph
9b of Chapter 2, “Doctrine Governing Unified Direction of
Armed Forces,” JP 1 [1]). We believe that it follows from
these instructions that all DoD IT efforts, insofar as they are
intended for use in military operations, should be developed
in such a way as to be interoperable with joint doctrine.
IV. FAILURES OF INTEROPERABILITY AND REQUIREMENT FOR
EFFECTIVE GUIDANCE TO IT DEVELOPERS IN THE FUTURE
The need for interoperability of DoD information
systems and for alignment of the data and information that
enables military action has been recognized repeatedly and
at the highest levels, and given today’s and tomorrow’s
flood of digital data across networks this need is becoming
ever more apparent.
For example, DoDI 8320.02, “Sharing Data,
Information, and Information Technology (IT) Services in
the Department of Defense” [8] requires that authoritative
data sources (ADSs) be ‘registered in the DoD Data
Services Environment (DSE).’
The DoDI directs further that ‘Data, information, and IT
services will be made … interoperable throughout their
lifecycles for all authorized users’. However, the instruction
to achieve such interoperability – namely through
‘enforcement of policy for DoD metadata that uses
Government and industry metadata standards’ – repeatedly
fails in its goal. This is not only because the policy is
formulated in a way that falls short of the required
specificity, but also because, even where relevant standards
exist, they have in almost all cases been created ad hoc, to
address specific local needs. Thus they have not been built
in the sort of coordinated, rule-governed way that would be
needed to achieve interoperability.
The problem of overly weak requirements is illustrated
also in the already mentioned DoDI 8330.01 on
“Interoperability” [6], where it is stated that the information
systems that DoD components use
must interoperate, to the maximum extent practicable, with
existing and planned systems (including applications) and
equipment of joint, combined, and coalition forces, other
U.S. Government departments and agencies, and non-

STIDS 2015 Proceedings Page 3

governmental organizations, as required based on the
operational context (italics added).

Because everything is by definition interoperable to ‘the
maximum extent practicable,’ this instruction is without
teeth.
DoDI 8320.02 suggests a further route to the
achievement of interoperability through adherence to
standards listed in the DoD IT Standards Registry (DISR).
Unfortunately, it is difficult to determine the degree of
interoperability of DISR standards, in part because the
needed assessment must be applied simultaneously to the
different portions of the DISR, and these often require
different sorts of permissions (and thus, we assume, are
accessible only to different sorts of people). Some of the
resources contributed to the DISR that we were able to
access, however, do not manifest – even when taken singly
– the sort of minimal terminological consistency or formal
regimentation that would be needed to meet the demands of
interoperability. The terminology defined in [9], for example, was created by selecting terms and definitions from a
wide range of sources. No common rules for definitions
were employed, and so there is no way of checking even for
simple logical consistency of the resulting artifact.
Achieving interoperability – both terminological and
structural [10] – is of course difficult for a large organization
like the DoD with a cumbrous history of information system
development. However, in recent years a number of best
practices for meeting the demands of inoperability have
been established, some of them very simple to implement.
Thus a first task would be to establish corresponding simple
rules that must be satisfied by IT systems developed by the
DoD in the future. We are concerned here only with issues
of terminological interoperability, which we propose should
be addressed through the creation of a benchmark ontology
framework centered around the JDO. We envisage that the
complementary structural interoperability might be tackled
in part through the deployment of W3C standard resources
such as RDF and the Web Ontology Language (OWL) [11].
The formulation of ontologies using OWL, in particular,
would allow computational reasoners to be used in a way
that provides automatic checking for consistency of
definitions with each new revision of a terminological
artifact such as JP 1-02. The ontology approach can thereby
support agile development and coordinated maintenance of
information systems in a way that does not sacrifice
terminological interoperability [12]–[16].
V. THE SOLUTION
DoDI 8330.01 [6] already requires that the content of
joint operational concepts, and associated doctrine and
operational procedures, address interoperability of the IT
used by the separate Services and also, where required, by
joint and multinational forces and other U.S. government
departments and agencies.
While DoD thus requires that joint doctrine addresses
the need for IT interoperability, it crucially does not require
– and has no effective strategy to ensure – that the IT
systems and procedures themselves address the need for

conformity with joint doctrine. We believe, however, that
such conformity is not only indispensable if unified action
between human warfighters and IT systems is to be
achieved, but further that it would bring multiple significant
benefits to military IT systems themselves, and thus also to
the developers of such systems, because it would provide a
benchmark for interoperability.
VI. UNIFIED ACTION OF HUMAN WARFIGHTERS AND
INFORMATION SYSTEMS
JP 1, the Capstone Publication of Joint Doctrine [1],
states that unified action demands ‘maximum
interoperability’:
The forces, units, and systems of all Services must operate
together effectively, in part through interoperability. This
includes joint force development; use of joint doctrine; the
development and use of joint plans and orders; and the
development and use of joint and/or interoperable
communications and information systems (italics added).

Because a military organization includes its information
systems, we believe that building the common language
provided by doctrine into the information systems that will
be used by warfighters is a vital need.
The DoD Manual (DoDM) 5120.01, “Joint Doctrine
Development Process” [17], provides the guidance that
steers DoD to consistent terminology across the joint
publications governing different types of operational
domains. Developers of doctrine are required to ‘use, to the
greatest extent possible, previously approved terminology
contained in the text of other JPs or in … JP 1-02.’ An
information system needs more than well-trained and
qualified people and high-quality equipment to provide
effective support to unified action. It must be supported also
by effective guiding principles and procedures rooted in an
understanding of the requirements of unified action. Our
proposal is that such support can be achieved in today’s
networked environment by extending the same guidance that
is provided to doctrine developers also to IT developers.
Those engaged in developing IT systems for military
operations should be required to take the terminology and
definitions of joint doctrine as their starting point.
Increasingly, if this proposal is adopted, doctrine developers
will come to be seen as constituting the first rank of
information technologists, providing the core terminological
content on which all DoD IT content will rest.
VII. RULES FOR DEFINITIONS IN INSTRUCTION 5705.01D
To see how JDO will be constructed, we need first to
understand some of the features of the Dictionary from
which it will be derived. The idea for such a dictionary is
expressed in DoDI 5025.12 of August 2009 [18], which
states that it is DoD policy to improve communications and
mutual understanding within the DoD, with other Federal
Agencies, and between the United States and its
international partners through the standardization of military
and associated terminology.
This position is restated in the Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff Instruction (CJCSI) 5705.01D of November

STIDS 2015 Proceedings Page 4

10, 2010 on the creation of a “Standardization of Military
and Associated Terminology.” [19] Specifically, the Chief
of the Joint Education and Doctrine Division (JEDD), J-7,
shall oversee the DoD Terminology Program and U.S.
participation in the NATO Terminology Programme; serve
as Joint Staff planner for terminology issues; and appoint
and supervise the Joint Staff terminologist.
Enclosure C of this instruction provides a “Definition
Writing Guide,” which includes a specification of the scope
of JP 1-02 and also simple rules for writing definitions. Such
rules are of obvious importance for our needs here, since an
ontological counterpart of JP 1-02 can be created only if the
definitions contained in the latter are in good order from the
point of view of logical consistency.
As concerns scope, the Guide specifies that the
Dictionary will include terms of general military or
associated significance. Technical or highly specialized
terms may be included if they can be defined in easily
understood language and if their inclusion is of general
military or associated significance. The Guide requires
further that the dictionary be non-redundant: thus, a term
will be added to the dictionary only if ‘[an] approved joint
term with similar definition does not exist.’
The Guide defines a definition as ‘a formal statement of
the exact meaning of a term that enables it to be
distinguished from any other.’ A definition is distinguished
from a description by the fact that the latter ‘is a narrative
containing information about the term that is not constrained
in format or content.’
Principles for the development of a definition require
that it should be:
Clear – Address the meaning of the term only. A
definition should not contain doctrinal or procedural
information; i.e., it should focus on describing “what” a
term is and not “how” or “why” it is used.
Concise – Be as brief as possible, including only
information that makes the term unique. Limit the
definition to one sentence whenever possible.
Complete – Include all information required to
distinguish the term from those that are related or
similar.
The Guide includes also a list of types of errors that are
to be avoided when writing definitions. For example, a
definition should not be over-restrictive; it should not be
circular; it should be positive (state what is covered by a
term rather than what is not covered); and it should contain
no hidden definitions (where the definition of one term is
embedded inside another).
The rules codified in the Guide conform very well to the
best practices identified by terminologists who have studied
the authoring of definitions [20]. That violations of these
rules have slipped though the coordination process,
however, is seen in the fact that errors of each of the
mentioned kinds can still be found (see Table 1).

Avoiding these and other types of errors would not only
make JP 1-02 more valuable to human users; it would also
enable the construction of the formal representations of its
content of the sort that are needed for use in computational
systems. We have already proposed a series of supplementary rules for the formulation of definitions (summarized in
[12]), rules which have been tested in some 150 ontology
initiatives over a wide variety of domains (see under ‘Users’
at [14]). We are applying these rules in building the JDO,
thereby providing a vehicle that can support the usage of
joint terminology by computers without sacrificing
understandability by humans. These definitions can also be
of help in the process of revising joint publications in the
future, allowing the content of JP 1-02 to be used as part of a
computational process of quality assurance for the use of
terminology in joint publications when successive revisions
are made.
UN C H
operational area =def. An overarching term
encompassing more descriptive terms (such as area of
responsibility and joint operations area) for geographic
areas in which military operations are conducted.
contingency operation =def. A military operation that
is either designated by the Secretary of Defense as a
contingency operation or becomes a contingency
operation as a matter of law (Title 10, United States
Code, Section 101[a][13])
subordinate command =def. A command consisting
of the commander and all those individuals, units,
detachments, organizations, or installations that have
been placed under the command by the authority
establishing the subordinate command.

x x

x

x

x x

Table 1: Examples of errors in JP 1-02 (from June 15, 2015)
U = unclear, N = not concise, C = circular, H = hidden definitions

VIII. PROPOSED SUPPLEMENTARY RULES FOR DEFINITIONS
We provide five examples of such rules, and illustrate
their application to creating the JDO.
Rule 1: Do not confuse the entity you are defining with
the term used to represent that entity.
(Failure to heed this rule is illustrated in the definition of
operational area in Table 1 – an operational area is not a
‘kind of overarching term’.)
Rule 2: Distinguish between general terms and proper
names.
Almost every JP 1-02 term is a general term, which is to
say, it is a term that refers to something general – a kind or
type (as in all the cases listed in Table 1) – having multiple
specific instances. A small number of JP 1-02 terms are
proper names, which is to say, they refer to exactly one
specific instance. Examples include the Universal Joint
Task List and Joint Doctrine Development System. Such
terms are standardly marked by use of initial capitals, but
their treatment in JP 1-02 is sometimes uncertain. The
definition of Army air-ground system, for instance,
suggests that there is exactly one Army air-ground system,
so that ‘Army air-ground system’ would be a proper name.

STIDS 2015 Proceedings Page 5

However, there may be a plurality of such systems used by
the Army at any given time.
Rules 3–5 apply only to general terms, and are satisfied
already by the definitions of many such terms in JP 1-02:
Rule 3: All general terms should be singular in number.
Rule 4: Each general term should have at most one
single parent term.
Rule 5: The definition of each general term A should
specify the associated parent term B and state what it is
about the As that marks them out from all other
instances of B as instances of A.
Thus a definition of a general term A should have the twopart form:
An A =def. a B which Cs.
For example (from [16]):
artillery vehicle =def. A vehicle which is designed for
the transport of one or more artillery weapons.
artillery weapon = def. A device which is designed for
projection of munitions beyond the effective range of
personal weapons.
Returning to JP 1-02 we can now, following rule 5, define:
operational area =def. A geographic area in which
military operations are conducted. (Contrast the first
row of Table 1.)
Here ‘geographic area’ is the parent term; the specific
difference is ‘in which military operations are conducted.’
The overwhelming majority of JP 1-02 definitions are
already of this form. Consider for example:
theater of operations =def. An operational area
defined by the geographic combatant commander for
the conduct or support of specific military operations.
Many of the remaining cases are easily converted to be of
this form without any change of meaning. Starting, for
example, from the definition:
cyberspace operations = def. The employment of
cyberspace capabilities where the primary purpose is to
achieve objectives in or through cyberspace.
Here two conversion steps are needed. The first replaces the
term to be defined with a singular noun following rule 2.
The second, in accordance with rule 5, adds a representation
of the appropriate parent term (here, trivially, operation) to
yield:
cyberspace operation =def. An operation that employs
cyberspace capabilities and has primary purpose: to
achieve objectives in or through cyberspace.
Such rules may seem trivial, and the effect of their
application may be very slight when measured against the
understandability and utility from the point of view of
human beings of the definitions to which they give rise. But
they bring two immediate benefits when IT systems are
brought into play. First, because IT developers lack

warfighters’ experience and therefore context, they need
definitions with as little ambiguity as possible. And second,
the changes proposed bring aid not only to the formalization
of joint doctrine terminology in the JDO – where adherence
to rule 5 allows immediate generation of the backbone
taxonomy of the ontology – but also to the quality assurance
of joint doctrine definitions themselves, by allowing easier
checking of logical consistency.
IX. BUILDING THE JDO
A. The OBO Foundry
Our strategy for building the JDO follows an approach to
coordinated ontology development as a means to advancing
interoperability across multiple domains that was first
successfully applied in the life sciences in the context of the
Open Biomedical Ontologies (OBO) Foundry initiative
([21]). The strategy rests on dividing the domain of
biomedicine into a number of sub-domains (for genes,
proteins, cells, and so forth) and creating ontology modules
representing the corresponding general types of entities.
Each ontology module consists of general terms organized
hierarchically through the parent-child relation between
types and subtypes. This relation then serves as the starting
point for the formulation of the definitions of the terms in
the hierarchy in accordance with Rule 5 above. This strategy
is currently being applied in a series of DoD and intelligence
community projects, in each case drawing on the Basic
Formal Ontology (BFO) [12], which serves as a common
upper level starting point for the creation of definitions of
the terms used in the domain ontologies at lower levels.
The predominance of general terms in JP 1-02 reflects
the purpose of military doctrine, which is to help warfighters
understand the realities of war and their specific situations.
It achieves these ends largely through the identification and
explanation not of specific instances (such as a particular
aircraft or IT system) but rather of important general
categories. Doctrine is re-usable because it is applicable to
many different instances and to many different sub-kinds of
the same general categories that re-appear in ever new
situations. This approach is effective because the basic
realities of war are not changed by the fielding of new
commanders, equipment, specialties, or tactics. A new IT
system may provide a commander with more information in
easier-to-understand formats; but the basic role of IT in
supporting unified action remains unchanged. Because the
developers of doctrine were so successful in identifying the
high-level categories of C2, commanders and others
continue to use these same categories when understanding
how to employ each new IT system to create better
operational capabilities.
The most general categories in military doctrine are:
(1) thing (people, equipment, organizations),
(2) attribute (capabilities, functions, roles, including
relational attributes of command or support), and
(3) process (for example, the joint planning process).

STIDS 2015 Proceedings Page 6

C. Building the JDO as Shadow JP 1-02
Our strategy for building JDO is incremental. We
proceed through the successive joint publications (JP n-m),
moving from general to specific, for instance from JP 3-0
(Joint Operations) to JP 3-14 and JP 3-17 (Space
Operations and Air Mobility Operations). The creation of an
ontology for each JP n-m then follows three steps:
i. ENRICHMENT: create JP n-mE, a shadow version of
those portions of JP 1-02 whose terms are defined in JP
n-m but enriched (E) through the addition of new terms –
for example, commander – that are not defined in JP 102 but used in JP n-m definitions;

Figure 1: OBO Foundry strategy for modular coordination

Nowhere is it stated explicitly in military doctrine that these
are the basic categories of the reality of war. Rather, the
doctrinal publications are divided by area of warfare and by
process (C2, intelligence, fire support, logistics, planning,
and so forth). One of the virtues of joint doctrine is its
consistent use of the same general terms representing subcategories of thing, attribute, and process across all the joint
publications. For example, every joint publication uses the
term commander (thing) for the officer appointed to
command (process) an organization (thing) and to
exercise authority (attribute) over subordinates. It is
impossible to understate the value of this achievement,
which has not only diminished communications barriers
among the warfighters of different specialties but also facilitated the application of IT in planning, training, and real
world operations. What is remarkable is that the authors,
managers, and terminologists of joint doctrine achieved this
consistency with minimal documented theory and procedures for categorization and for the writing of definitions.

ii. LOGICAL REGIMENTATION: create JP n-mLR, a
logically regimented (LR) version of JP n-mE, in which
definitions are formulated in humanly understandable
English but with the logical regimentation sketched in
our summary treatment of supplementary rules for
definition writing in section VII, as supplemented by the
further rules set forth in [12]);
iii. FORMALIZATION: create JP n-mF, in which the
human-readable definitions in JP n-mLR are formalized
(F) using the Web Ontology Language (OWL);
Content from CCO is incorporated in each stage as needed.
Examples are provided at http://ncor.buffalo.edu/JDO-Oct2015.

B. BFO and the Common Core Ontologies
In our view, BFO provides the documented theory
needed to fill this gap [12]. BFO is architected around the
same upper-level categories (of thing, attribute, and
process) used by joint doctrine. More importantly, BFO
serves as the starting point for a suite of associated resources
– based on the Common Core Ontologies (CCO) (see [11]
and Figure 2) – that have been purpose built to support IT
applications in the military and intelligence domains.
The CCO and other domain-ontology modules are (1)
defined in BFO terms and then (2) they are themselves
extended through the addition of domain-specific subontologies along the lines illustrated in Figure 2. The BFO
community has refined and tested the needed theory and
procedures for generating such sub-ontologies in agile
fashion and for preserving their usability and mutual
consistency across successive versions. [14]-[16].

Figure 2: Common Core and associated domain ontologies

X. POTENTIAL BENEFITS OF THE JDO TO THE WARFIGHTER
We are developing the JDO to support efforts to extend
the applicability of doctrine in those areas where
commanders, planners, and other warfighters need to call
upon information and information support in order to be
effective. JDO will provide a computationally accessible
counterpart of the content of JP 1-02 designed to support
unified action by advancing terminological consistency and
interoperability.
The major benefit of JDO should take the form of better
C2 through improved communication, self-synchronization,
and projection into the future, and in each stage of
development of the JDO we will be testing its utility in
supporting improvements along all of these dimensions.

STIDS 2015 Proceedings Page 7

some previous definition in JP 1-02. Integration of the JDO
within the larger BFO–CCO framework would also help to
resolve some of the problems that arise when expressions
are used in JP 1-02 definitions but are themselves not
defined in JP 1-02.
XI. POTENTIAL BENEFITS OF JDO TO THE DOCTRINE STAFF

Figure 3: Examples of CCO and JP 1 terms descending from BFO
in the JDO

As stated in JP 6-0 (“Joint Communications System”)
[13], a C2 system has two elements: (1) the people, who
make decisions and accomplish missions, and (2) the
facilities, equipment, communications, staff functions, and
procedures essential to the commander for C2. People can
conduct C2 without facilities, equipment and so forth, but
the latter cannot perform C2 without people. Since unified
action occurs not only between people and organizations,
but also between IT systems and people, by advancing
interoperability in the ways described above, a successfully
developed JDO can facilitate moving past the low level of
unity of action among people, organizations, and IT systems
that has been achieved until now.
A subsidiary benefit takes the form of providing ways to
extend the range of IT-supported uses of the content of
doctrine, for example, by allowing the DoD Dictionary to
serve as an entry point for web-based searches across
multiple repositories of authoritative data; by facilitating
greater coordination of training and operations; and by
increasing automation of processes such as plan specification, course of action development, and operations and
Blue Force Status assessment, particularly within highly
contested environments.
We anticipate that the JDO will allow further
enhancements of JP 1-02, for example, by providing for
each term in the dictionary its own web page that can serve
as a repository of usage and of revision history. This last
benefit is part of our more general strategy to assist
developers of the hundreds of IT systems that are developed
for U.S. military operations to achieve the benefits of
interoperability and to keep track of needed information.
Access to detailed information on the usage and revision
history of the vocabularies of the intended users of these
hundreds of systems would facilitate unified action among
IT developers, for example, by helping to rectify the current
situation in which even the best-intentioned and
conscientious IT developers must make assumptions on
whether a warfighting term in a specification that is listed in
joint doctrine is intended to be defined by the current or by

Anticipated benefits of JDO to doctrine authors include
the ability to apply standard ontology editing and visualizing
software, for example, to create visualizations of how
different parts of doctrine interact, of the doctrinal content
relevant to particular types of operations or capabilities, or
of the ways doctrine is used (and not used) in specific plans
and operations. These benefits include opportunities for
logical tracking of dependences among terms and definitions
to identify (direct and indirect) circularities and thereby to
help to ensure, when changes in definitions are made in the
process of revision, that the effects of these changes cascade
appropriately through all dependent definitions.
For example, imagine that revisions need to be made to
the definition of a term such as base defense illustrated in
Figure 4. The Figure tells us which definitions then need to
be checked for continued validity, by showing the terms in
JP 1-02 that are defined using base defense either directly or
indirectly (by inheritance from a definition lower down the
corresponding chain).

Figure 4: Fragment of the JP 1-02 network generated by the
relation is used to define.

We believe that terminological interoperability can be
achieved only where the terminologies involved are
developed as part of, or are defined in terms derived from, a
common benchmark ontology framework. Only such a
framework can provide a basis for clearly formulated logical
relations between terms, and only this will allow the sort of
automated checking for consistency that is needed when the
terminological content of multiple information systems is
aggregated together in larger (actual or virtual) systems.
This requirement for automated consistency checking
becomes all the more urgent as terminological artifacts are
revised over time. We believe that the value of the JDO will
reveal itself not least in supporting consistent revision of JP
1-02 in tandem not merely with Service and coalition
doctrines but also with information artifacts such as the
Universal Joint Task List (UJTL), the Joint Lessons Learned
Information System (JLLIS), and their Service counterparts.

STIDS 2015 Proceedings Page 8

Finally, JDO can also help the many teams of ontologists
working on different military and intelligence community
initiatives to advance information discovery and processing.
The JDO will enable doctrine to serve as a new source of
ground truth for ontologists across DoD and IC that can help
to ensure mutual consistency and identify wasteful redundancies as well as gaps and errors in existing ontologies. It
will contribute to consistent and yet agile development of IT
technology while also counteracting current tendencies
toward silo formation and failures of interoperation.
APPENDIX: EXAMPLES OF PRIOR WORK
The practical value of an ontology-based approach to
supporting operational military IT has been demonstrated
most conspicuously in the ICODES (Integrated Computerized Deployment System) load-planning system, a
program of record employed by the DoD since 1997 [22].
A more recent example is the AFRL (Air Force
Research Lab)/USTRANSCOM Mission Data and
Transport Ontology project described in [23]. Here, the goal
was to create a domain model of U.S. Transportation
Command’s operations, including operational processes,
organizations, and Commander’s Critical Information
Requirements (CCIR), to be used to support the monitoring
of information relevant to USTRANSCOM missions.
Specifically, rules were used to modify terms and definitions
of the Joint Mission Essential Task List (JMETL) in ways
similar to those described in section VIII in relation to the
definitions of operational area and cyberspace operations.
When the resulting domain model was used with the
Securboration MetaTagger application, there was a
reduction 20% in the numbers of people required for
monitoring for critical information and a reduction of 1–3
days in discovering such information.
Another AFRL effort used analogous rules in
transforming a portion of the Joint Capability Areas (JCA)
taxonomy into an ontology-based model that was then
processed by a machine-learning algorithm to train an application. Formalizations of the JCA descriptions were used to
allow comparisons of unstructured text against each of the
formalized descriptions in order to determine matches.
Initial attempts to disambiguate each of the JCA descripttions failed because of redundancy and ambiguity. Instead, a
hybrid was created consisting of formalizations of JCA descriptions along with word bags of their respective contents.
A machine learning algorithm was then used to compare
historical user input against both to train the algorithm.
Here, too, the implementation (described in [24]) shows a
reduction in 1–3 days for discovering critical information
that could affect USTRANSCOM operations, for example,
in case of earthquake or other disaster and a 20% reduction
in manpower required for monitoring the information.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Our thanks go to Lieutenant Colonel James McArthur
(USMC JS J7), Lieutenant Colonel William D. Betts (USAF
JS J7), Tatiana Malyuta (CUNY), Tony Stirtzinger
(Securboration), Andreas Tolk (MITRE/Old Dominion
University), and Erik Thomsen (Charles River Analytics).

REFERENCES
[1] Joint Publication (JP) 1, Doctrine for the Armed Forces of the United
States, 25 March 2013.
[2] M. R. Hieb, S. Carey, M. Kleiner, M. Hieb, R. Brown, “Standardizing
Battle Management Language – A Vital Move Towards the Army
Transformation”, IEEE Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, 2001.
[3] S. Lambert, M. R. Hieb, “Improving Unity of Effort in Command and
Control Processes: An Operational Analysis of a Joint Doctrinal
Language”, Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, 2006, 743-752.
[4] Tolk, Andreas, and Curtis Blais. “Taxonomies, Ontologies, Battle
Management Languages – Recommendations for the Coalition BML Study
Group”, Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop 2005.
[5] Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization (SISO), Standard
for: Coalition Battle Management Language (C-BML), Phase 1 SISO-STD011-2012-DRAFT 4 April 2012.
[6] Department of Defense Instruction 8330.01, “Interoperability of
Information Technology (IT), Including National Security Systems (NSS)”,
May 21, 2014.
[7] Joint Publication (JP) 1-02, Department of Defense Dictionary of
Military and Associated Terms, as amended through 15 June 2015.
[8] Department of Defense Instruction Number 8320.02, “Sharing Data,
Information, and Information Technology (IT) Services in the Department
of Defense”, August 5, 2013.
[9] Acquisition Community Connection (ACC) Practice Center, Terms
and Definitions, Open Systems Architecture, https://acc.dau.mil/
Community Browser.aspx?id=220108&lang=en-US, October 14, 2015.
[10] J.-F. Ethier, O. Dameron, V. Curcin et al., “A unified structural/terminological interoperability framework based on LexEVS”, Journal of the
American Medical Informatics Association, 2013, 20, 986-994.
[11] J. R. Schoening, et al., “PED fusion via enterprise ontology,"
Proceedings of SPIE 9464, Ground/Air Multisensor Interoperability,
Integration, and Networking for Persistent ISR VI.
[12] R. Arp, B. Smith, A. D. Spear, Building Ontologies with Basic
Formal Ontology, Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 2015.
[13] Joint Publication (JP) 6-0, Joint Communications System, June 2015.
[14] Basic Formal Ontology, http://ifomis.org/bfo, September 2015.
[15] D. Salmen, T. Malyuta, A. Hansen, S. Cronen, B. Smith, “Integration
of Intelligence Data through Semantic Enhancement”, Semantic Technology
in Intelligence, Defense and Security (STIDS), 2011, CEUR 808, 6-13.
[16] B. Smith, T. Malyuta, W. S. Mandrick, C. Fu, K. Parent, M. Patel
“Horizontal Integration of Warfighter Intelligence Data. A Shared
Semantic Resource for the Intelligence Community”, Semantic Technology
in Intelligence, Defense and Security (STIDS), 2012, CEUR 996, 112-119.
[17] Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Manual (CJCSM) 5120.01,
“Joint Doctrine Development Process,” December 29, 2014
[18] Department of Defense Instruction 5025.12, “Standardization of
Military and Associated Terminology,” August 14, 2009.
[19] Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Instruction 5705.01D
“Standardization of Military and Associated Terminology,” Nov. 10, 2010.
[20] S. Seppälä. “An ontological framework for modeling the contents of
definitions”, Terminology, 21(1):23–50, 2015.
[21] B. Smith, et al., “OBO Foundry: Coordinated Evolution of
Ontologies to Support Biomedical Data Integration”, Nature
Biotechnology, 25 (11), 1251-1255.
[22] K. Pohl and P. Morosoff, “ICODES: A Load-Planning System that
Demonstrates the Value of Ontologies in the Realm of Logistical
Command and Control (C2)”, InterSymp-2011, 2011.
[23] J. M. Powers, Keith D. Shapiro, and David S. Monk, “Information
Exchange and Fusion in a Collaborative Environment using Semantic
Information Requirements”, International Conference on Collaboration
Technologies and Systems (CTS 2014). 597-601.
[24] Securboration, “Human assisted analysis for change alignment to an
Enterprise Architecture”, Requirements Analysis Portlet (RAP). May 2012.

STIDS 2015 Proceedings Page 9

