On learning from taxi-GPS traces
João Mendes-Moreira1 and Luı́s Moreira-Matias2
1

1

LIAAD-INESC TEC, Faculty of Engineering, University of Porto
Tel.: +351-22-5082142
jmoreira@fe.up.pt
2
Nec Lab, Heidelberg
luis.matias@neclab.eu

The challenge

Electronic taxi dispatch systems are in wide use today. These systems have
replaced the traditional VHF-radio dispatch by installing mobile data terminals
in taxis, which typically provide GPS localization information and taximeter
state. In the last couple of years, the broadcast-based radio messages for service
dispatching were replaced by unicast-based messages between the taxi central
and the selected vehicle.
In most cases, taxi drivers operating through an electronic dispatch system
do not indicate the final destination of the ride. In some cases, particularly
when the demand for taxis is higher than the taxi availability, the closest taxi
to a particular location is exactly the taxi that will end its current ride at that
location. While in broadcast-based radio dispatching this was not a problem,
in unicast-based electronic dispatching it becomes a problem, given that most
drivers do not indicate the final destination of their current ride. To improve the
efficiency of electronic taxi dispatching systems it becomes important to be able
to predict the final destination of busy taxis. The spatial trajectory of a busy
taxi could provide some hints on where it is going. Similarly, given the taxi id,
it might be possible to guess its final destination based on the regularity of prehired services. In a significant number of taxi rides (approximately 25%), the taxi
has been called through the taxi call-center, and thus the passenger’s telephone
id can be used to narrow the destination prediction based on the historical ride
data of such telephone id.
In this challenge, the goal was to build a predictive framework able to infer the
final destination of each taxi ride based on their (initial) partial trajectories. This
challenge was divisible in two different outputs: (a) the destination coordinates
(WGS84) and (b) the total trip’s travel time (counting from the service’s starting
point, in seconds). The entries were evaluated using the Mean Haversine Distance
and the Root Mean Squared Logarithmic Error, regarding the destination and
the travel time prediction problems, respectively.

2

The dataset

As training set it was provided an accurate dataset describing a complete year
(from 01/07/2013 to 30/06/2014) of the (busy) trajectories performed by all the

2

João Mendes-Moreira and Luı́s Moreira-Matias

442 taxis running in the city of Porto (Fig.1), in Portugal (i.e. 3Gb of data stored
in one single CSV file). These taxis operate through a taxi dispatch central, using
mobile data terminals installed in the vehicles. We categorize each ride into
three categories: A) taxi central based, B) stand-based or C) non-taxi central
based. For the first, it was provide an anonymized id, when such information is
available from the telephone call. The last two categories refer to services that
were demanded directly to the taxi drivers on a B) taxi stand or on a C) random
street.

Fig. 1. Porto city map with taxi-stands signalized

Each data sample corresponds to one completed trip. It contains a total
of nine features: trip id, call type, otigin call, origin stand, taxi id, timestamp,
day type, missing data, polyline.
Five datasets were provided for validation.
A total of two sample submission files were provided. One regarding the
destination prediction problem while the second one focusing on the travel time
prediction problem. Both always using the same output value for all samples.
For the first problem, it used the location of Porto’s main Avenue, in downtown
(i.e. Avenida dos Aliados). For the second one, the averaged travel time of all
trips in the training set was used.

3

The contest and the papers

The contest was done through Kaggle 3 . More than 700 teams have participated.
The three papers presented are the winners of each of the two subproblems (a)
3

https://www.kaggle.com/

On learning from taxi-GPS traces

3

and (b) a third paper whose team was 7th and 3rd in subproblems (a) and (b)
respectively. Alexandre de Brébisson, Étienne Simon, Alex Auvolat, Pascal Vincent and Yoshua Bengio, all working partial/full time at MILA lab, University
of Montréal, Canada won subproblem (a) using multi-layer perceptrons, bidirectional recurrent neural networks and models inspired from memory networks.
Thomas Hoch from Software Competence Center Hagenberg GmbH, Austria
won subproblem (b) using ensemble learning combined with a spatial clustering
approach. Hoang Thanh Lam, Ernesto Diaz-Aviles, Alessandra Pascale, Yiannis
Gkoufas, and Bei Chen from IBM research, Ireland present a solution based on
trip matching and ensemble learning.

Acknowledgements
We thank all members of GeoLink, for the data and the given support to mount
this challenge. We also thank the program committee of this challenge as well
as the organizers of the ECML-PKDD 2015 conference.

