Toward Representing and Recognizing
Cyber-Physical Elements in Competition Using
Event Semantics
Alonza Mumford, Duminda Wijesekera, Paulo Costa
George Mason University
amumford@gmu.edu, dwijesek@gmu.edu, pcosta@gmu.edu

Abstract—The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) is observing an increasing number of incidents involving recreational
drones, and imagining a future where every drone will be
equipped with an Automatic Dependent Surveillance-Broadcast
(ADS-B) transponder that communicates and cooperates with
the FAA’s Next Generation (NextGen) Aviation Cyber-Physical
System in order to help mitigate aerial collision risk [1]. This
exemplar application involves human or autonomous agents
interacting within some sort of cyber-physical system where
competition or cooperation between cyber-physical elements
exist. We anticipate that the use of higher-level abstractions
will be required for modeling human or autonomous agent’s
interactions within these type of systems in order to make sense
of the observations derived from sensor-data. In this paper, we
articulate an approach that uses event semantics to represent
the temporal, spatial, factor, and outcome features of activities
generated by competing or cooperating agents functioning within
a cyber-physical environment. We use those semantics, along with
observations of activity, to model higher-level activity abstractions
and to help perform strategy recognition from a concrete,
competition-oriented scenario reflected in a real-world, game data
set comprised of more than a half million events involving nearly
8500 unique agents. The strength of the approach is grounded in
a specification of event semantics for our concrete multi-agent,
competitive game ontology using Resource Description Framework Schema (RDFS) and Ontology Web Language (OWL). By
leveraging these Semantic Web languages, we anticipate that the
use of event semantics to describe cooperative or competitive
agent interactions within cyber-physical systems will become
more predominant in the future.
Index Terms—Agent-Based Model, Human Agent, Autonomous Agent, Unmanned Aerial Vehicle, Gridiron Football,
Semantic Web

some real-world applications where the activities of human and
physical autonomous agents are identified by sensors coupled
to a cyber-physical system:
• In the National Football League (NFL), each football
player and stadium is equipped with RFID sensors and
receivers permitting the league to track fine-grained location data for each play. In this case, the Internet-of-Things
(IoT) and CPS has been incorporated into operations and
management of professional sports venues [2].
• In the recreational Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) market, some manufacturers have equipped their drones with
ADS-B sensors, which is a type of sensor for aerial cooperative collision detection and avoidance [3]. ADS-B is an
element of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA)’s
Next Generation Air Transportation System (NextGen),
which has been described as a airborne network instantiation of a cyber-physical system [1].
These examples also illustrate a specific characteristic
present in some cyber-physical systems where competition
or cooperation exist between human or physical autonomous
agents. Subsequently, this paper reflects an interest in these
type of cyber-physical systems. This research effort is narrowly focused on identifying higher-level abstractions such
as strategies used by agents from observations derived from
sensors in the CPS. Further, we focus on an approach for
the representation and modeling of competitive actions and
interactions of agents in cyber-physical systems.
II. M ETHODOLOGY

I. I NTRODUCTION
Cyber-physical systems (CPS) are at the outset of completely changing how society interacts with the physical world
around it. These systems measure different features across
the physical environment (e.g., the location of an agent) and
enable computational models that interact with a cyber-core
(i.e., the computing and communications backbone of the CPS)
and with their corresponding physical environment to provide
some desired benefit or utility. In most cases, sensors provide
the cyber-core with the primary mechanism for recognizing
events or changes in the physical environment. The actions and
interactions between human or physical autonomous agents
and the cyber-core are captured through sensors. Consider

The high-level methodology for this research activity has
been decomposed into five components. First, an exemplar for
our experiment is identified. Gridiron Canadian and American
Football is distinguished as an elaborate, competitive game
activity that involves multiple agents, which are organized
into two teams for the purpose of executing a series of
offensive/defensive advances intended to score points and win
the game. This scenario is selected to match the CPS exemplar
identified in [2]. A NFL play-by-play data set that offers
a likeness or model of the kind of RFID-derived data we
would expect in [2] is acquired for the experiment. Second,
the information within the data set is conceptualized based on
the domain knowledge of Gridiron Football and modeled for

STIDS 2015 Proceedings Page 82

its semantic relationships using event semantic abstractions.
The result is the contributed Gridiron Football Ontology,
which is a conceptual vocabulary of American and Canadian
football, in the namespace http://www.ncsu.org/kr/fball. Third,
the data set is extracted from its previous form, transformed
into the Resource Description Framework (RDF) metadata
model (including serialization) according to the fball ontology
and loaded into a public-accessible SPARQL Protocol and
RDF Query Language (SPARQL) Endpoint and RDF Store.
Fifth, we integrate or point a public-accessible SPARQL
Endpoint Explorer for Expressive Question Answering to the
Gridiron Football Event Endpoint in order to interrogate the
nearly 40 million triples generated for indications of tactics or
strategies being employed during game events. Further details
are provided in each respective section of the paper.
III. P ROPOSED S OLUTION
A. Data
Our research effort was presented with a considerable
challenge pertaining to the acquisition of rich context data
that would comprise human or agent activities, and that would
simulate the type of data we would expect to acquire from the
scenario identified in [2].

Fig. 1. An example illustration of play-by-play text generated by a NFL
statistician, which translates to: a RUSH play event occurred at the "7 minute
and 41 seconds" timestamp of the quarter; D. Williams rushed the ball in the
direction of his Left Guard and progressed 6 yards up to the 13 yard line of
the opposing Pittsburgh Steelers team; and where he was jointly tackled by
A. Branch and G. Grissom.

Prior to recent introduction of RFID sensors into NFL game
stadiums [2], the data capture of movements of players on a
football game field demanded a human-in-the-loop to observe
the execution of plays across the field and to sequentially
report the specifics of each event as illustrated in figure 1.
During games, this reporting data is manually generated by
a distributed network of league statisticians, and immediately
propagated from individual stadiums to hundreds of websites
in a span of seconds [2]. In turn, the data set used in the
experiment is provided by a sports analysis firm that uses web
extraction and other techniques to generate a structured data
set from disparate web post left by these league statisticians.
The data set contains NFL play-by-play events from 2000 to
2013. Further, we assert that this data is characteristic of the
type of complex yet coarse- or fine-grained event data that
can be expected from observations of human or autonomous
physical agent’s activities as they engaged in competition
within a cyber-physical system.
B. Domain Knowledge Acquisition
An effort was made to grasp an understanding of the physical environment in which our football player agents operate.
Domain knowledge of concepts such as game field, players,
game timeline, driving the ball, alternating possession of the

ball, kickoffs, free kicks, scoring and penalties associated
with Gridiron Football was acquired primarily through a
literature review of popular publications such as Football’s
Matchup Zone Coverages [4], The Art of Place-Kicking and
Punting [5], Defending the Spread Offense [6], Offensive
Football Strategies [7] and Winning Football [8]. Familiarity of
these concepts was used to formulate ontological abstractions
designed to codify types of events with associative kinds of
entity-attribute-models with agent, temporal, spatial, factor and
product classes and relationships in the Gridiron Football
Ontology.
C. Formal Ontology Modeling
The contributed Gridiron Football Ontology expresses a
formal representation of knowledge within the Gridiron (or
American and Canadian) Football domain via a set of concepts
and inter-concept relationships. The ontology is engineered
according to a methodology that partitions the ontology into
two levels: theory ontology (or upper ontology) and domain
ontology (or lower ontology). The theory ontology is abstract
and compact. It focuses on concepts such as time, space, goals,
etc. The domain ontology provides a formal description of
the classes (i.e., concepts) and relationships between classes
that exist in a domain. In this manner, the Gridiron Football
Ontology is conceived as a two-level ontology with an upper
level that abstracts a football game as a sequence of organized spatio-temporal events and a lower level that provides
a concrete specification of the ontology components (i.e.,
individuals, classes, attributes, relations, etc.) associated with
Gridiron Football. By concrete specification, we mean that the
ontology is machine-readable and understandable. The result
is that RDF Schema (RDFS) Language and Web Ontology
Language (OWL)-based ontological software components were
developed for all items (370+ unique key-value pairs) in
the NFL Play-by-Play data set. Ontological modeling and
engineering efforts were assisted using several Semantic Web
tools to include CMAP Knowledge Modeling Environment [9]
and Stanford Protege [10].
At the center of the upper ontology is the notion of an
event, and we reuse the existing Event Ontology developed
at Queen Mary, University of London [11]. The ontology is
partitioned into a set of classes and properties identified as:
event:Event, which is an arbitrary classification of a space/time
region, which may have participating agents, passive factors,
products, and a location); event:sub_event, which provides a
mechanism to partition a complex event; event:agent, which
relates an event to an active agent such as a person; event:time,
which relates an event to a time object such as a duration of
time. event:place, which relates an event to a spatial object;
event:product, which relates an event to something produced
during an event; and event:factor, which relates an event to
something that contributes to its result such as a cause.
In figure 2, domain-specific classes and properties are
created through subsumption of the event:Event class to
model the many type of events associated with Gridiron
Football. For example, fball:GameEvent class conceptualizes

STIDS 2015 Proceedings Page 83

Fig. 2. A detailed specification of the fball ontology’s Active Agent description using portions of the Event Ontology and Friend Of A Friend (FOAF)
vocabularies. In this context, an active agent is a person or machine that performs in an event. Ontological components that are members of the upper ontology
are illustrated in blue color whereas the members of the Gridiron Football domain ontology are colored in yellow.

STIDS 2015 Proceedings Page 84

Fig. 3. A detailed specification of the fball ontology’s active agent description using portions of the Event Ontology and Basic Geo vocabularies.

a football game whereas fball:SeasonEvent represents a
football season. In the case of the NFL, a season event
is comprised of 16 football games over a duration of 17
weeks. The fball:hasFootballSubEvent property is devised
through subsumption of the event:hasSubEvent property and
used to partition a Season event and a Game event into
a collection of games and collection of plays respectively.
The foaf:Agent class and its sub-classes, foaf:Person
and foaf:Group are extended to model the various types
of football playing positions (e.g., fball:LeftTackle), the
membership of particular playing positions to certain
football sub-groups (e.g., a Left Tackle has membership
of the fball:OffensiveLineUnit). The fball:Player is
established to represent the idea of a generic football
player that has datatype properties (i.e., attributes) such as
fball:hasFullName, fball:hasPrimaryPosition, fball:hasHeight,
fball:has40YardDashTime and fball:hasBenchPressWeight.
The fball:hasPlayer, fball:hasUnit and fball:hasTeam
properties are created by means of subsumption of the
event:hasAgent property to relate football persons and groups
to kinds of football events. For example, the fball:hasPlayer
property is used to establish a relation between the
fball:FumbleEvent and one of three player roles expected
or required during a fumble type of event: fball:Fumbler,
fball:ForcingPlayer and fball:RecoveringPlayer.

Football. For example, fball:KickoffOutcome is related to
fball:KickoffEvent using the fball:hasOutcome. Though not
shown, the event:Product and event:hasProduct are subsumed to generate the various types of football outcomes
and fball:hasOutcome property respectively. In addition,
domain-specific classes and properties are devised by way
of subsumption of the event:Factor class to model the
many types of factors that affect different types of football events associated with Gridiron Football. For example,
fball:WeatherFactor and fball:FieldConditionFactor are related to fball:GameEvent using the fball:hasEventFactor. The
event:Factor and event:hasFactor are subsumed to generate
the various types of football factors and fball:hasEventFactor
property respectively.
In addition, portions of the Time [OWL-TIME] [12] and
The WGS84 Geo Positioning Ontology [Basic Geo] [13]
vocabularies are used. The primary classes and properties
include: time:TemporalEntity, which is a parent class that
relates temporal information to an event; time:Interval, which
is a subclass of TemporalEntity and temporal things with
extent that have interior points; and geo:SpatialThing, which
is a parent class that relates spatial information to an event.
For brevity, the time and spatial ontological components used
in the fball ontology are not described; however, spatial
ontological components are illustrated in figure 3.

Domain-specific classes and properties are devised by
way of subsumption of the event:Product class to model
the many types of outcomes that result from different types of football events associated with Gridiron

D. Metadata (RDF) Creation
This work involved creating efficient RDF representations
for the NFL Play-by-Play data set using the Gridiron Football
Ontology. The effort experimented with reasoning software

STIDS 2015 Proceedings Page 85

Fig. 4. An illustration of the SPARKLIS interface/engine being used to interrogate the RDF triples generated from the Gridiron Football Ontology and NFL
data set. In this example, the attributes of location, time, factor, outcome and agent entities associated with this particular NFL play event are explored.

for the purpose of providing an inference reasoning capability
to the project’s software components for deriving new RDF
triples (knowledge) from the instances generated directly from
input data and its related ontology. This activity involved
software development using the Apache Jena Open Source
Java Framework for Semantic Web Development [14] to covert
the elaborate NFL play-by-play data set, which is comprised of
more than a half million game events and nearly 8500 unique
agents, to a semantic graph containing 44,676,644 RDF triples.
E. Metadata Storage and Retrieval
Specifically, this effort consisted of the deployment a
SPARQL End-Point web server and RDF-based triple store
using the Apache Fuseki/TDB suite [15]. Ingest of triples
into the triple store are primarily made by scripts or the
upload feature in the Apache Fuseki web client. Queries
are made through also made through the SPARQL interface
within the Fuseki client as well as the Sparklis: a SPARQL
Endpoint Explorer for Expressive Question Answering [16]
web service. In Figure 4, an illustration of SPARKLIS being
used to interrogate the generated NFL Football triples is given.
IV. ACTIVITY AND S TRATEGY R ECOGNITION
In this section, we apply our approach of ontology-based
activity recognition to the Gridiron Football domain and try
to show how event semantics may be used to help identify the
base offensive scheme being used by a particular team during
a football game. In Gridiron Football, an offensive scheme
can be thought of as an offensive strategic system that a team

uses to counter his opponent’s defensive attack. Here, we show
multiple components that may be decomposed from a team’s
overall offensive scheme according to [17]:
•
•

•
•
•
•
•

•

Running Component: Man/Power Blocking, Zone Blocking and Flex Blocking
Passing Component (Setup Mode): Run to Setup the Pass,
Pass to Setup the Run and Take What the Defense Gives
You
Passing Component (Tempo): Normal Tempo and HurryUp Tempo
Passing Component (Huddle): Normal Huddle and No
Huddle
Passing Component (Length of Passes): Short to Intermediate and Vertical Intermediate to Deep Passing Game
Passing Component (Quarterback Position): Under Center and Pistol Depth, Shotgun Depth
Passing Component (Route Assignments): Route Tree
Assignments (Air Coryell), Group Assignments (ErhardtPerkins)
Passing Component (How, Where, When): Predetermined
Pass to Spot Before Break, Predetermined Pass to a
Person after the Break and Option Pass to a Person after
the Break

In our experiment, we attempt to identify these components
of an offensive scheme. This is at least partially achieved by
integrating a natural language-to-RDF query engine to our
fball project’s SPARQL-endpoint/RDF triple store. The integration of these two technologies allowed our research team

STIDS 2015 Proceedings Page 86

to interrogate the fball event knowledgebase for a collection
of propositions (i.e., statements that are either true or false)
that may be supported by the facts represented in the triplestore knowledgebase. Principally, a collection or sequence of
statements would be derived to simulate a strategy-recognition
pattern that matches against the RDF-encoded triples in the
store and provide evidence of certain offensive scheme components. Identifying certain offensive components such as Pass
Component (Huddle): No Huddle and Passing Component
(Tempo): Hurry-Up Tempo was fairly simple and straight forward to accomplish. This ease to identify a particular offensive
component was due primarily to completeness of data and
that offensive component being directly available within the
fball knowledgebase to directly support that question. In other
cases, even with the detection of an offensive component or
combination of offensive components it was not sufficient for
identifying a more complex offensive strategy. To illustrate that
point, here we focus on a particular type of offensive strategy
called a West Coast Offense strategy. As background domain
knowledge, we offer football passing theory that describes
the West Coast Offense as the concept of using short passes
to replace some of the running attacks [18]. Moreover, the
short pass receiver is expected to run for good yardage after
the completion. Therefore, a West Coast Offense strategy is a
composite strategy of at least two of the components identified
in the previous enumeration: the Passing Component (Setup
Mode) and Passing Component (Length of Passes).

Fig. 5. An illustration of the average percentage of short-to-intermediatedistance pass attempts versus intermediate-to-long-distance pass attempts by
NFL teams known to incorporate a West Coast Offense Strategy.

In figure 7, we show an example of the type of natural
language query used by our researchers for detecting pass
completions by a particular team during a single football
season where the receiver or pass target caught the pass within
5 yards of the goal line and net gained 15 yards or greater
after the pass completion. It follows that this particular team,
which is the 2013 Miami Dolphins, coached by Joe Philbin
and offensively coordinated by Mike Sherman, was known for
using a West Coast Offensive strategy during the 2013 game
season [19]. In figure 8, we show the results of the query.

Fig. 6. An illustration of the average percentage of short-to-intermediatedistance attempts versus intermediate-to-long-distance pass attempts by NFL
teams known to not incorporate a West Coast Offense Strategy.

Our researchers asked the following question: "In the time
duration of a football game or season is this team using a
west Coast Offense strategy as part of its offensive scheme?
It follows that the research team proposed the following
hypothesis, which is two-fold:
• In regard to the Passing Component (Setup Mode), if the
team demonstrates a higher percentage of Pass to Setup
the Run attempts (i.e., passing attempts) than a team that
demonstrates a higher percentage of Run to Setup the
Pass attempts (i.e., rushing attempts); and
• in regard to the Passing Component (Length of Passes),
if a team demonstrates a higher percentage of Short to
Intermediate pass attempts as compared to the percentage
of Vertical Intermediate to Deep Passing Game passes.
In the evaluation of our detection pattern for the use of a
West Coast Offense strategy in the base offensive scheme for a
particular team, we were not able to identify teams that were
definitely employing this strategy. In figure 5, we illustrate
the average percentage of short-to-intermediate pass attempts
and intermediate-to-long pass attempts that were executed by
NFL teams that were known to use a West Coast Offense
strategy as part of their base offensive scheme during the 2013
game season. In figure 6, the same statistics are illustrated;
however, in this case we show the statistics of teams that were
not known to use a West Coast Offense strategy during the
2013 Season. A quick visual examination of these bar charts
show that there is not any major difference in the percentage of
short- to long-distance pass attempts between the two category
of teams (i.e., those known to use a West Coast Offense and
those that do not). In addition to the statistics on Passing
Component (Length of Passes), statistics related to the Passing
Component (Setup Mode) also did not show a major difference
between teams known to use a West Coast Offense versus those
that are not known to use that type of strategy.
V. P RELIMINARY R ESULTS & D ISCUSSION
A number of insights were made as a result of our
research effort. First, we believe that the complexity and

STIDS 2015 Proceedings Page 87

Fig. 7. An illustration of a natural language query using the SPARKLIS engine/interface that models the pattern of West Coast Offense scheme .

Fig. 8. An illustration of the query results from the West Coast Offense pattern-based query. Note the illustration shows observations of the West Coast
Offense strategy being used by the Miami Dolphins football team during a game event in 2013

fine-granularity of the real-world, NFL Play-by-Play data set
provided our team with an intermediate step for evaluating the
application of semantic-based event models to the observations
of human or autonomous agents engaged in competition at
the scale we would expect within a cyber-physical system.
As stated previously, NFL football players and stadiums are
equipped with RFID sensors and we assert that the type of
sensor data that we expect to be derived by an NFL Stadium
Venue’s cyber-physical system (CPS) will be similar to the
data used by our research team. This type of activity data
provided the research team with a unique challenge in effort
to properly reflect in each RDF statement the appropriate
semantic using the Gridiron Football Ontology. We expect

that the modeling of other applications or domains involving
human or autonomous agents competing or cooperating within
a cyber-physical system would present a similar challenge.
The primary strength of the ontology-based activity (strategy) recognition approach is the relative simplicity and
straightforwardness involved in incorporating domain knowledge and heuristics into the recognition models. The use
of event semantics was especially beneficial in this regard.
For instance, the The Event Ontology provides the ability to
model and interrogate the NFL event knowledgebase based
on five dimensions: event type, time, location, factor and
outcome. Additionally, the upper ontology also provided an
abstraction (i.e., event:hasSubEvent) for describing an event

STIDS 2015 Proceedings Page 88

that is composed of other events. This abstraction allowed the
research team identify what type of football sub-events were
associated with a particular play event, drive event, game event
or season event. For example, a particular play event may be
comprised of a penalty event and a pass event.
Though challenging, the research team determined that
developing semantic queries that can detect certain strategies
being used by NFL competing agents is possible. Initially,
the research team exclusively relied on the development of
SPARQL queries. Thereafter, the team learned that the guidance of an expressive Natural Language-to-RDF query builder
such as SPARKLIS is useful for formulating straightforward
queries for answering particularly complex hypotheses. The
weakness of solely using the ontology-based strategy recognition approach is the lack of learning ability in terms of
identifying patterns that can identify certain complex strategies. In this case, machine learning techniques for performing
statistical and probabilistic reasoning may have been useful.
However, the logical model approach (i.e., ontology-based
activity recognition) can certainly play a dominant role when
it is integrated along with techniques for learning patterns
as well as dealing with the inability of the logical model to
represent fuzziness and uncertainty. We offer that our approach
and contribution is an intermediate step that can be further
extended to include using an instance of an event ontology
as a seed ontology for statistical and probabilistic strategy
recognition. In some cases, this seed ontology may be used
to develop a more comprehensive ontology using ontology
learning techniques.
VI. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
In this paper, an approach is given for capability that uses
event semantics to represent the temporal, spatial, factor, and
outcome characteristics of events generated from the observations of agents engaged in a competitive activity between each
other. Further, we have described the likeness of the data set
used for this experiment with the kind of data set we would
expect to be generated from the type of "cyber-physical game"
scenario identified in [2]. The approach extends existing modular vocabularies and is based in the specification of event semantics for our contributed Gridiron Football Ontology using
Resource Description Framework Schema (RDFS) language
and Ontology Web Language (OWL). Our future work has
already begun and includes: extending the event ontology to an
applicable data set for autonomous physical agents cooperating
or competing within a cyber-physical system. Moreover, our
effort seeks to integrate aspects of game theory analysis with
the ontology-based strategy recognition approach to account
for concepts such as payoffs and tensions between the different
strategies that may be used by agents.

also like to acknowledge Arm Chair Analysis as the source of
the NFL data set used in this research project.
R EFERENCES
[1] K. Namuduri, Y. Wan, M. Gomathisankaran, and R. Pendse, “Airborne
network: a cyber-physical system perspective,” in Proceedings of the first
ACM MobiHoc workshop on Airborne Networks and Communications.
ACM, 2012, pp. 55–60.
[2] T. Olavsrud, “The internet of things comes to the nfl,” Jul 2015.
[3] S. Trimble, “Google targets low-cost ads-b out avionics market,” 2015.
[4] J.
Durham,
Football’s
Matchup
Zone
Coverages.
Harding
Press,
1998.
[Online].
Available:
https://books.google.com/books?id=qhcKAAAACAAJ
[5] D. Jennings, M. Bahr, R. Danmeier, and D. Herbst, The Art of Placekicking and Punting. Linden Press/S&S, 1985. [Online]. Available:
https://books.google.com/books?id=Z31YAAAAYAAJ
[6] J. Rice, Defending the Spread Offense. Coaches Choice, 2010. [Online].
Available: https://books.google.com/books?id=lOkXRAAACAAJ
[7] A.
F.
C.
Association,
Offensive
Football
Strategies.
Human
Kinetics,
2000.
[Online].
Available:
https://books.google.com/books?id=pHbvMbMZKjQC
[8] B. Ramseyer, Winning Football. Human Kinetics 1. [Online]. Available:
https://books.google.com/books?id=IuxRAgAAQBAJ
[9] A. J. Cañas, G. Hill, R. Carff, N. Suri, J. Lott, T. Eskridge, G. Gómez,
M. Arroyo, and R. Carvajal, “Cmaptools: A knowledge modeling and
sharing environment,” in Concept maps: Theory, methodology, technology. Proceedings of the first international conference on concept
mapping, vol. 1, 2004, pp. 125–133.
[10] N. F. Noy, M. Crubézy, R. W. Fergerson, H. Knublauch, S. W. Tu,
J. Vendetti, M. A. Musen et al., “Protege-2000: an open-source ontologydevelopment and knowledge-acquisition environment,” in AMIA Annu
Symp Proc, vol. 953, 2003, p. 953.
[11] Y. Raimond and S. Abdallah, “The event ontology,” Technical report,
2007. http://motools. sourceforge. net/event, Tech. Rep., 2007.
[12] J. R. Hobbs and F. Pan, “Time ontology in owl, w3c working draft 27
september 2006,” W3C Working Draft, vol. 27, 2006.
[13] D. Brickley, “Basic geo (wgs84 lat/long) vocabulary, 2006,” Cité en,
p. 52.
[14] A. Jena, “A free and open source java framework for building semantic
web and linked data applications,” URL: http://jena. apache. org, 2011.
[15] A. Jena-Fuseki, “serving rdf data over http,” 2014.
[16] S. Ferré, “Sparklis: a sparql endpoint explorer for expressive question
answering,” in ISWC Posters & Demonstrations Track.
[17] G.
Morris,
“Football
101:
Understanding
basic
nfl
offensive
concepts,”
2014.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.bloggingtheboys.com/2014/8/11/5965033/football101-understanding-basic-nfl-offensive-concepts
[18] T.
Flores
and
B.
O’Connor,
Coaching
Football.
McGraw-Hill Education, 2006. [Online]. Available:
https://books.google.com/books?id=mrsIBAAAQBAJ
[19] W. C. offense, “West coast offense — wikipedia, the free
encyclopedia,” 2015, online accessed 02-September-2015. [Online].
Available: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WestCoastoffense

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to acknowledge the Sparklis research
activity under Dr. Sebastien Ferre supported at IRISA, Universite de Remes, Rennes cedex, France. The authors would

STIDS 2015 Proceedings Page 89

